[Extension-docs] New Getting started with Chrome Extensions collection (#3328)
GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com: site/en/docs/extensions/mv3/getstarted/tut-tabs-manager/index.md

    <button>Group Tabs</button>
    <ul></ul>

    <script src="./popup.js" type="module"></script>
  </body>
</html>
```

{% Aside %}

💡 **TIP**: You can use [top level await][mdn-top-level] by adding `type="module”` to the script
tag.

{% endAside %}

Next, let's style the popup. Create a popup CSS file and include the following code:

{% Label %}popup.css:{% endLabel %}

```css
body {
  width: 20rem;
}

ul {
  list-style-type: none;
  padding-inline-start: 0;
  margin: 1rem 0;
}

li {
  padding: 0.25rem;
}
li:nth-child(odd) {
  background: #80808030;
}
li:nth-child(even) {
  background: #ffffff;
}

h3,
p {
  margin: 0;
}
```

### Step 3: Manage the tabs {: #step-3 }

The [Tabs API][api-tabs] allows an extension to create, query, modify, and rearrange tabs in the
browser.

#### Request permission {: #narrow }

Many features in the Tabs API do not require any permissions to use. However, in our case, we need
to declare a permission to access two sensitive properties: the `title` and the `URL`. 

We could request `"tabs"` permission, which would allow us to see the sensitive properties of all
the browser tabs. However, to protect user privacy, we will request narrow [host

> permissions][doc-match], giving us access _only_ to the title and URL of **specific sites**.

Author: I'm playing with the idea of including a screenshot of each permission warning in a details component in case some developers are curious, but at the same time won't make this section so bulky.

> permissions][doc-match], giving us access _only_ to the title and URL of **specific sites**.

Author: I changed the copy, feel free to make any change

Add the following code to the manifest JSON file:

{% Label %}manifest.json:{% endLabel %}

```json
{
  ...
  "host_permissions": [
    "https://developer.chrome.com/*"
  ],
  ...
}
```

#### Query the tabs {: #query }

You can retrieve the tabs from specific URLs using the `tabs.query()` method. Create a `popup.js`
file and add the following code:

{% Label %}popup.js:{% endLabel %}

```js
const tabs = await chrome.tabs.query({
  url: [
    "https://developer.chrome.com/docs/webstore/*",
    "https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/*",
  ],
});
...
```

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
💡 **Can I use Chrome APIs directly in the popup?**
{% endDetailsSummary %}

A popup and other extension pages can call any [Chrome API][doc-apis] because they are served from the

> chrome schema. For example `chrome-extension://EXTENSION_ID/popup.html`.

Author: I think we decided to change this 🤔 I found an issue where we discussed the placeholder convention. Here's the issue: [Placeholder values](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com/issues/1940) and [associated PR](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com/pull/1953)

    // need to focus window as well as the active tab
    await chrome.tabs.update(tab.id, { active: true });
    await chrome.windows.update(tab.windowId, { focused: true });
  });

  elements.add(element);
}
document.querySelector("ul").append(...elements);
...
```

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
💡 **Interesting JavaScript used in this code**
{% endDetailsSummary %}

- The [Collator](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Intl/Collator) is used to sort the tabs array by title in any language.
- The [template tag](https://web.dev/webcomponents-template/) is used to
  define an HTML element that can be cloned instead of using `document.createElement()` to create each item.
- The [URL constructor](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/URL/URL) is used to create and parse URLs.

{% endDetails %}

#### Group the tabs {: #group}

Add the following code to create a button that will group all the tabs using [`tabs.group()`]() and
move them into the current window.

{% Label %}popup.js:{% endLabel %}

```js
...
const button = document.querySelector("button");
button.addEventListener("click", async () => {

>   const group = await chrome.tabs.group({ tabIds: tabs.map(({ id }) => id) });

Reviewer: For clarity, I think it would be better to split the `chrome.tabs.group()` call and the `tabs.map()` call. This approach allows the developer to place a breakpoint on the `const group` line and see the value of `tabIds`.

```suggestion
  const tabIds = tabs.map(({ id }) => id);
  const group = await chrome.tabs.group({ tabIds });
```

Reviewer: Alternatively, this makes it more clear what the entire object will be at debug time.

```suggestion
  const groupOptions = {
    tabIds: tabs.map(({ id }) => id) }),
  };
  const group = await chrome.tabs.group(groupOptions);
```

Between the two approaches, I have a slight personal preference for my first suggestion.

Author: Agreed, let's go with the first suggestion.

  await chrome.tabGroups.update(group, { title: "DOCS" });
});
```

The [TabGroups][api-tabgroups] API allows the extension to name the group and choose a background
color. Add the `“tabGroups”` permission to the manifest by adding the following code:

{% Label %}manifest.json:{% endLabel %}

```json
{
  ...
  "permissions": [
    "tabGroups"
  ]
}

> ```

Reviewer: I'd suggest moving this above the previous code block. The intent with this change is to encourage developers to remember that they must request permission for an API before they can use that API in their code.

Author: Good idea! 👍

## Test that it works {: #try-out }

> Verify that the file structure of your project looks like the following: 

Reviewer: Nit: I think this reads more clearly, but that may just be personal bias.

```suggestion
Verify that the file structure of your project matches the following directory tree: 
```

```text

> └── Tabs-manager/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
└── tabs-manager/
```

    ├── manifest.json
    ├── popup.js
    ├── popup.css
    ├── popup.html
    └── images/
        ├── icon-16.png
        ├── icon-32.png
        ├── icon-48.png
        └── icon-128.png
```

### Load your extension locally {: #locally }

To load an unpacked extension in developer mode, follow the steps in [Development
Basics][doc-dev-basics-unpacked].

### Open a few documentation pages {: #open-sites}

Open the following docs in different windows:

- [Design the user interface][doc-ui]
- [Discovery on the Chrome Web Store][cws-discovery]
- [Extension development overview][doc-devguide]
- [Manifest file format][doc-manifest]
- [Publish in the Chrome Web Store][cws-publish]
- [Welcome to Chrome Extension Development][doc-welcome]

Click on the popup. It should look like this:

<figure>
{% Img src="image/BhuKGJaIeLNPW9ehns59NfwqKxF2/8q5ps3dqw4p2BOZRpIJT.png", 
alt="Tabs Manager extension popup", width="600", height="230", class="screenshot" %}
  <figcaption>
  Tabs Manager extension popup
  </figcaption>
</figure>

> 

Reviewer: This screenshot doesn't show the group behavior. Could we add another step to illustrate what should happen when the user clicks the "Group Tabs" button?

Author: Added a second screenshot 💯

## Potential enhancements {: #challenge }

Based on what you’ve learned today, try to implement any of the following:

> - Improve the popup stylesheet.

Reviewer: Nit: Slightly less onerous wording. "Improve" may feel like it's too hard to do, but something like "customize" or "tweak" may feel more playful and inviting.

```suggestion
- Customize the popup stylesheet.
```

- Change the color and title of the tab group.

> - Manage the tabs of another documentation site.

Reviewer: Sug: IDK if this is a good idea, but I know we talked about it when discussing what features to add to this demo :)

```suggestion
- Manage the tabs of another documentation site.
- Add support for ungrouping the grouped tabs.
```

## Keep building! {: #continue }

Congratulations on finishing this tutorial 🎉. Continue developing your skills by completing other
tutorials on this series:

| Extension                        | What you will learn                                                    |
|----------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [Reading time][tut-reading-time] | To insert an element on every page automatically.                      |
| [Focus Mode][tut-focus-mode]     | To run code on the current page after clicking on the extension action. |

## Continue exploring

We hope you enjoyed building these Chrome extensions and are excited to continue your Chrome

> development learning journey. We recommend the following learning path:

Reviewer: This paragraph sounds like it's signing off for the entire series of tutorials. Is that the intent?

Given that the samples can be completed in any order, I think it may be better to include this section in all of the tutorials.

Author: Done! 👍

---
layout: 'layouts/doc-post.njk'
title: 'Tabs Manager'
subhead: 'Build your first tabs manager.'
description: 'Learn how to create a tabs manager.'
date: 2022-08-10
# updated: 2022-06-13
---

## Overview {: #overview }

This tutorial builds a tabs manager for Chrome extension and Chrome Web store documentation pages.

<figure>
{% Img src="image/BhuKGJaIeLNPW9ehns59NfwqKxF2/8q5ps3dqw4p2BOZRpIJT.png", 
alt="Tabs Manager extension popup", width="500", height="230", class="screenshot" %}
  <figcaption>
  Tabs Manager extension
  </figcaption>
</figure>

In this guide, we’re going to explain how to do the following:

- Create an extension popup using the [Action][api-action] API.
- Query for specific tabs using the [Tabs][api-tabs] API.
- Preserve user privacy through narrow host permissions.
- Change the focus of the tab.
- Move tabs to the same window and group them.

> - Rename tabs group using the [TabGroups][api-tabgroups] API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Rename tab groups using the [TabGroups][api-tabgroups] API.
```

## Before you start {: #prereq }

This guide assumes that you have basic web development experience. We recommend checking out
[Development Basics][doc-dev-basics] for an introduction to the extension development workflow.

## Build the extension {: #build }

> To start, create a new directory called `tabs-manager` that will hold the extension's files. If you

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To start, create a new directory called `tabs-manager` to hold the extension's files. If you
```

prefer, you can download the complete source code on [Github][github-tabs-manager].

### Step 1: Add the extension data and icons {: #step-1 }

> Create a file called `manifest.json` and include the following code:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a file called `manifest.json` and add the following code:
```

{% Label %}manifest.json:{% endLabel %}

```json
{
  "manifest_version": 3,
  "name": "Tab Manager for Chrome Dev Docs",
  "version": "1.0",
  "icons": {
    "16": "images/icon-16.png",
    "32": "images/icon-32.png",
    "48": "images/icon-48.png",
    "128": "images/icon-128.png"
  },

>   ...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

}
```

These manifest keys are explained in more detail in the [Reading time
tutorial][tut-reading-time-step1]. 

> Create an `images` folder and place the icons inside. You can download the icons
> [here][github-tabs-manager-icons].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create an `images` folder then [download the icons][github-tabs-manager-icons] into it.
```

The [Action][api-action] API controls the extension action (toolbar icon). When the user clicks on
the extension action, it will either run some code or open a popup, like in this case. Start by
declaring the popup in the manifest:

{% Label %}manifest.json:{% endLabel %}

```json
{
  ...
  "action": {
    "default_popup": "popup.html"
  },
  ...
}
```

A popup is similar to a web page with one exception: it can't run inline JavaScript. Create a popup
HTML file and add the following code:

{% Label %}popup.html:{% endLabel %}

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8" />
    <meta http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible" content="IE=edge" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="./popup.css" />
  </head>
  <body>
    <template id="li_template">
      <li>
        <a>
          <h3 class="title">Tab Title</h3>
          <p class="pathname">Tab Pathname</p>
        </a>
      </li>
    </template>

    <h1>Google Dev Docs</h1>
    <button>Group Tabs</button>
    <ul></ul>

    <script src="./popup.js" type="module"></script>
  </body>
</html>
```

{% Aside %}

> 💡 **TIP**: You can use [top level await][mdn-top-level] by adding `type="module”` to the script

Reviewer 2: What is this and why would I want to use it?

Author: In practice, you can use the await keyword outside of async functions. See a more [in-depth explanation](https://v8.dev/features/top-level-await).
  
I think most javascript developers would be familiar with this concept. But we can check with @dotproto to see if adding more context is necessary.

tag.

{% endAside %}

> Next, let's style the popup. Create a popup CSS file and include the following code:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, let's style the popup. Create a popup CSS file and add the following code:
```

{% Label %}popup.css:{% endLabel %}

```css
body {
  width: 20rem;
}

ul {
  list-style-type: none;
  padding-inline-start: 0;
  margin: 1rem 0;
}

li {
  padding: 0.25rem;
}
li:nth-child(odd) {
  background: #80808030;
}
li:nth-child(even) {
  background: #ffffff;
}

h3,
p {
  margin: 0;
}
```

### Step 3: Manage the tabs {: #step-3 }

The [Tabs API][api-tabs] allows an extension to create, query, modify, and rearrange tabs in the
browser.

#### Request permission {: #narrow }

You can use many methods in the Tabs API without requesting any permission. However, we need access to the `title` and the `URL` of the tabs; these sensitive properties require permission.

We could request `"tabs"` permission, but this would allow access to the sensitive properties of **all** browser tabs. Since we are only managing tabs of a particular site, we will request narrow host permissions. 

Narrow [host permissions][doc-match] allow us to protect user privacy by granting elevated permission to **specific sites**. This will grant access to the `title`, and `URL` properties, as well as additional capabilities.

> Add the following code to the `manifest.json` file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add the highlighted code to the `manifest.json` file:
```

{% Label %}manifest.json:{% endLabel %}

> ```json

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```json/2-3
```

{
  ...
  "host_permissions": [
    "https://developer.chrome.com/*"
  ],
  ...
}
```

<!-- TODO: Details with each permission warning -->

#### Query the tabs {: #query }

You can retrieve the tabs from specific URLs using the `tabs.query()` method. Create a `popup.js`
file and add the following code:

{% Label %}popup.js:{% endLabel %}

```js
const tabs = await chrome.tabs.query({
  url: [
    "https://developer.chrome.com/docs/webstore/*",
    "https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/*",
  ],
});
...
```

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
💡 **Can I use Chrome APIs directly in the popup?**
{% endDetailsSummary %}

A popup and other extension pages can call any [Chrome API][doc-apis] because they are served from the
chrome schema. For example `chrome-extension://EXTENSION_ID/popup.html`.

{% endDetails %}

#### Focus on a tab {: #focus}

> First, the extension will sort the list alphabetically. Then, when a list item is clicked, it will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, the extension will sort tab names (the titles of the contained HTML pages) alphabetically. Then, when a list item is clicked, it will
```

Reviewer 2: Did I correctly infer what was being sorted? We need to say either way.

  element.querySelector(".title").textContent = title;
  element.querySelector(".pathname").textContent = pathname;
  element.querySelector("a").addEventListener("click", async () => {
    // need to focus window as well as the active tab
    await chrome.tabs.update(tab.id, { active: true });
    await chrome.windows.update(tab.windowId, { focused: true });
  });

  elements.add(element);
}
document.querySelector("ul").append(...elements);
...
```

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
💡 **Interesting JavaScript used in this code**
{% endDetailsSummary %}

- The [Collator][mdn-collator] used to sort the tabs array by the user's preferred language.
- The [template tag][webdev-template-tag] used to
  define an HTML element that can be cloned instead of using `document.createElement()` to create each item.
- The [URL constructor][mdn-url-constructor] used to create and parse URLs.
- The [Spread syntax][mdn-spread-syntax] used to convert the Set of elements into arguments in the `append()` call.

{% endDetails %}

#### Group the tabs {: #group}

The [TabGroups][api-tabgroups] API allows the extension to name the group and choose a background

> color. Add the `“tabGroups”` permission to the manifest by adding the following code:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
color. Add the `“tabGroups”` permission to the manifest by adding the highlighted code:
```

{% Label %}manifest.json:{% endLabel %}

> ```json

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```json/2-4
```

#### Request permission {: #narrow }

You can use many methods in the Tabs API without requesting any permission. However, we need access to the `title` and the `URL` of the tabs; these sensitive properties require permission.

We could request `"tabs"` permission, but this would allow access to the sensitive properties of **all** browser tabs. Since we are only managing tabs of a particular site, we will request narrow host permissions. 

> Narrow [host permissions][doc-match] allow us to protect user privacy by granting elevated permission to **specific sites**. This will grant access to the `title`, and `URL` properties, as well as additional capabilities.

Author: @dotproto Please review this copy about the tabs and narrow host permissions. Feel free to edit for clarity.

Reviewer: As I was reviewing this I found myself debating whether the extension should be using the `"tabs"` permission or request host permissions for the doc site. The main issue with requesting host permissions is that we will be changing how host grants work in the foreseeable future. Today, when an extension declares an array of host permissions in the `"host_permissions"` manifest field, those permissions are granted at install time. In the future, extensions will default to running "on click" and users will be able to choose to grant an extension persistent access to a host. In other words, the current approach taken by this guide may lead to unexpected results.

IMO there are 4 approaches we could take.

1. Leave the demo and tutorial as is.
    * Pro: No extra work.
    * Con: May end up confusing and surprising developers down the road.
2. Leave the demo as is, but add a warning to the tutorial that describes how the host permissions changes will affect this approach.
    * Pro: Lets us take different approaches in different demos (not sure if that's actually relevant).
    * Con: Leaves proper handling of permissions "as an exercise for the reader" (i.e. good luck!)
3. Expand the demo and tutorial to include host permissions checks and (if necessary) a runtime host permission request.
    * Pro: More robust. Better sets expectations long-term and demonstrates how to navigate these constraints.
    * Con: Creates a decent amount of new work.
4. Switch the demo and tutorial to the tabs permission.
    * Pro: Relatively easy to implement.
    * Pro: Robust against the long term direction of the platform.
    * Con: Scary permission warning.

Short term, I think the two best options are (2) and (4). If we go with (2), we can expand to (3) further down the road.

---

I started to revise this section to dive into the tradeoffs between tabs and host permissions, but realized I was spending too much time on it and going too deep into this. In case it's useful, though, here's what I came up with.

> You can use many methods in the Tabs API without requesting any permission. However, in order to find and show a list of extensions documentation tabs, we will need to read the `title` and `url` properties of all relevant tabs.
> 
> There are two many ways we can do this: the `"tabs"` permission and host permissions. Both approaches have drawbacks.
> 
> The `"tabs"` permission grants an extension the ability to read sensitive data on **all** tabs including the title and URL of the tab. Over time, this information could be used to collect a user's browsing history. As such, if you request this permission Chrome will display a warning message at install time that says the extension can "Read your browsing history". 
> 
> Host permissions grant an extension the ability to inject scripts on a page … "Read and change your data on developer.google.com"
```

Reviewer 2: I would go with 4. Making promises about future functionality in product documentation should be avoided. You don't know what implementation problems you'll run into that could lead to a change in design. You don't know what change in circumstances could lead to a change in priorities. The chance that we'll remember to update the article is low.

Reviewer: We discussed this in today's extensions TW sync and decided to proceed with (1). When we scoped out the set of concepts we wanted to cover in these gettings started tutorials, two concepts we wanted to introduce in this example were narrow host permissions and privacy considerations. If we went with option (4), we would need to find another way to introduce these concepts. (1) also leaves the door open to update the tutorial as described in (3) once the default host permission grant change lands in Chromium.

Author: I'll follow the decision made at the TW sync (1). Simeon, I think your expanded copy about the differences between both choices could go under a details component. I'll play with this idea later today.

@jpmedley, you can start with the editorial review of the other files for now. Thanks!  :)

Author: @dotproto [Here's the preview of this section](https://deploy-preview-3328--developer-chrome-com.netlify.app/docs/extensions/mv3/getstarted/tut-tabs-manager/#narrow). I added a details component with further explanation.
